4.5 release page (#1138)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_release_4_5/entry-systems-xr-fragment-density-map-support.md

---
type: entry
section: systems
subsection: XR
rank: 1
importance: 4
anchor: fragment-density-map-support
title: Fragment density map support
text: |
  In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, a little cheating is often necessary. As players tend to turn their head rather than move their eyes too far from the center and as pixels around the edges of the viewport are often distorted by the lens, why should the device render these parts at full resolution?

  This is exactly what the "Fragment Density Map" Vulkan extension does: it renders the edges of the viewport at a lower resolution with little noticeable decrease in quality. It makes the Mobile renderer (using the Vulkan rendering driver) more viable for VR on standalone.

>   It is not necessarily a new feature to Godot, as the "Fragment Rate Shading" Vulkan extension already does something similar. But they differ in terms of device compatibility. Don’t worry though, as Godot will now choose the best supported method for the device. Users will only have to care about "Variable Shading Rate", which is the term that encompasses both extensions.

Reviewer: This is technically describing "foveated rendering" which is a use of the "Fragment Density Map" extension. Here's an attempt to rewrite this to reflect that:

```suggestion
anchor: foveated-rendering-on-vulkan-mobile
title: Foveated rendering on Vulkan Mobile
text: |
  In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, a little cheating is often necessary. The human eye sees more detail at the center of your gaze, and less around your peripheral vision. So, why should we render the edges of the viewport at full resolution?

  This is called "foveated rendering" and it's something Godot has supported with OpenGL or Vulkan on desktop (via the "Fragement Shading Rate" extension) for a long time.
  
  However, now support for the "Fragment Density Map" Vulkan extension has been added which also enables this on the Vulkan Mobile renderer, making it a more viable option for standalone VR headsets.
```

contributors:
- name: Darío
  github: DarioSamo

> read_more: https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/99551

Reviewer: PR https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/99768 is also important here

```suggestion
read_more: https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pulls?q=is%253Apr+is%253Amerged+99551+99768
```

---
type: entry
section: systems
subsection: xr
rank: 0
importance: 4
anchor: fragment-density-map-support
title: Fragment density map support
blockquote: TODO
text: |

>   In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, it is OK to cheat a little. As players tend to turn their head rather than move their eyes too far from the center and as pixels around the outside of the viewport are often distorted by the lens, why should the device render these parts at full resolution?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, it is OK to cheat a little. As players tend to turn their head rather than move their eyes too far from the center and as pixels around the edges of the viewport are often distorted by the lens, why should the device render these parts at full resolution?
```
I'd say "the outside of the viewport" is outside the viewport, not on the edges of it inside it

>   In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, it is OK to cheat a little. As players tend to turn their head rather than move their eyes too far from the center and as pixels around the outside of the viewport are often distorted by the lens, why should the device render these parts at full resolution?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  In order to push great visuals on a VR headset, a little cheating is often necessary. As players tend to turn their head rather than move their eyes too far from the center and as pixels around the outside of the viewport are often distorted by the lens, why should the device render these parts at full resolution?
```

>   This is exactly what the "Fragment Density Map" Vulkan extension does: it renders the outside of the viewport at a lower resolution with little noticiable decrease in quality. It makes the Mobile renderer (using the Vulkan rendering driver) more viable for VR on standalone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This is exactly what the "Fragment Density Map" Vulkan extension does: it renders the edges of the viewport at a lower resolution with little noticeable decrease in quality. It makes the Mobile renderer (using the Vulkan rendering driver) more viable for VR on standalone.
```
Same here, plus typo

>   It is not necessarily a new feature to Godot, as the "Fragment Rate Shading" Vulkan extension already does something similar. They differ though in terms of device compatibility. Don't worry though, as Godot will now choose the best supported method for the device. Users will only have to care about "Variable Shading Rate", which is the term that encompasses both extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  It is not necessarily a new feature to Godot, as the "Fragment Rate Shading" Vulkan extension already does something similar. They differ in terms of device compatibility though. Don’t worry though, as Godot will now choose the best supported method for the device. Users will only have to care about "Variable Shading Rate", which is the term that encompasses both extensions.
```

Author: I chose to write instead `But they differ in terms of device compatibility.` as "though" is used just after.
